# Installing Cycle ORM

This guide is a beginner-friendly walkthrough on installing and configuring Cycle ORM. We'll also touch upon the basics
of setting up an entity. More detailed use-cases are available in other sections of the documentation.

## Requirements

Ensure your setup meets the following prerequisites:

* PHP 8.0+
* PHP-PDO
* Necessary PDO drivers for your chosen databases

## Package installation

### Step 1: Install the ORM

Cycle ORM can be seamlessly integrated into your project with Composer. In your project's root directory, execute:

```terminal
composer require cycle/orm
```

### Step 2: Annotations and Attributes

For those who wish to use attributes with their entities, an additional package is available:

```terminal
composer require cycle/annotated
```

> **Note:**
> This step is optional. If you prefer, you can define your mapping schema manually.

### Step 3: Include the Autoloader

Before you get started, ensure your bootstrap includes the autoload `vendor/autoload.php` generated by Composer:

```php index.php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);
include 'vendor/autoload.php';
```

## Configuration

First of all, you'll need to configure a database connection. The `Cycle\Database\DatabaseManager` service, a part of
the `cycle/database` package, serves as your go-to solution.

Here's how you can set up your first database connection:

```php index.php
<?php declare(strict_types=1);
include 'vendor/autoload.php';

use Cycle\Database;
use Cycle\Database\Config;

$dbal = new Database\DatabaseManager(
    new Config\DatabaseConfig([
        'default' => 'default',
        'databases' => [
            'default' => ['connection' => 'sqlite']
        ],
        'connections' => [
            'sqlite' => new Config\SQLiteDriverConfig(
                connection: new Config\SQLite\MemoryConnectionConfig(),
                queryCache: true,
            ),
        ]
    ])
);
```

> **Note:**
> To explore more on connecting to other databases, visit [Connect to Database](/docs/en/database/connect.md) section.

You can check your database connection using the following code:

```php index.php
// ...

print_r($dbal->database('default')->getTables());
```

And run the script:

```terminal
php index.php
```

The output should contain an array of tables in your database.

## Entity schema declaration

Mapping entities in Cycle ORM can be approached in multiple ways, ensuring flexibility based on your project's
requirements. This section provides an overview of two predominant methods:

- Entity attributes.
- Custom schema definitions.

Start by defining your first entity within the `src` directory of your project. Next, ensure Composer recognizes your
namespace:

```json composer.json
//...

"autoload": {
"psr-4": {
"Example\\": "src/"
}
}
```

Afterwards, refresh your autoload:

```terminal
composer du
```

Now you can create your first entity. Let's call it `User`:

```php src/User.php
<?php

declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Example;

class User
{
    private int $id;

    public function __construct(
        private string $name,
    ) {
    }

    // getters and setters...
}
```

### Entity Attributes

Attributes, introduced in PHP 8, provide a declarative way to specify metadata directly in the entity classes. They are
a concise and expressive method for entity mapping. In most cases, they are the preferred way to define your entity
schema.

> **Note:**
> Attributes won't degrade your application's performance. They are only used during the schema compilation process.

To use attributes, you'll need to install the `cycle/annotated` package:

```terminal
composer require cycle/annotated
```

Let's add attributes to our `User` entity:

```php src/User.php
<?php

declare(strict_types=1);

namespace Example;

use Cycle\Annotated\Annotation\Entity;
use Cycle\Annotated\Annotation\Column;

#[Entity]
class User
{
    #[Column(type: "primary")]
    private int $id;

    public function __construct(
        #[Column(type: "string")]
        private string $name,
    ) {
    }

    // getters and setters...
}
```

**In this example:**

- The `#[Entity]` attribute marks the class as an entity. **It's required for all entities.**
- The `#[Column]` attribute specifies the column type for the respective properties.

> **Note:**
> Read more about available attributes in the [Annotated Entities](../annotated/prerequisites.md) section.

After defining your entities using attributes, you'll usually combine this with a schema generator to translate these
declarations into a usable ORM schema.

#### Schema Generator

In order to operate we need to generate an ORM Schema which will describe how our entities are configured. Though we can
do it manually, we will use the schema compiler and generators provided by `cycle/schema-builder` package, and also
generators from `cycle/annotated` package.

**Initializing the Class Locator**

First, we have to create instance of `Spiral\Tokenizer\ClassLocator` which will automatically find the required
entities:

```php index.php
//...

$finder = (new \Symfony\Component\Finder\Finder())->files()->in([__DIR__]); // __DIR__ here is folder with entities
$classLocator = new \Spiral\Tokenizer\ClassLocator($finder);
```

To verify that your class is detectable (remember, `ClassLocator` statically indexes your code):

```php
print_r($classLocator->getClasses());
```

**Compiling the Schema**

With the class locator set, you can piece together your schema compilation pipeline. This is the sequence through which
your entities pass, undergoing transformations, validations, and finally, integration into the ORM schema.

```php index.php
use Cycle\Schema;
use Cycle\Annotated;
use Doctrine\Common\Annotations\AnnotationRegistry;

$dbal = /** ... */;

// Initialize annotations
AnnotationRegistry::registerLoader('class_exists');

$schema = (new Schema\Compiler())->compile(new Schema\Registry($dbal), [
    new Schema\Generator\ResetTables(),             // Reconfigure table schemas (deletes columns if necessary)
    new Annotated\Embeddings($classLocator),        // Recognize embeddable entities
    new Annotated\Entities($classLocator),          // Identify annotated entities
    new Annotated\TableInheritance(),               // Setup Single Table or Joined Table Inheritance
    new Annotated\MergeColumns(),                   // Integrate #[Table] column annotations
    new Schema\Generator\GenerateRelations(),       // Define entity relationships
    new Schema\Generator\GenerateModifiers(),       // Apply schema modifications
    new Schema\Generator\ValidateEntities(),        // Ensure entity schemas adhere to conventions
    new Schema\Generator\RenderTables(),            // Create table schemas
    new Schema\Generator\RenderRelations(),         // Establish keys and indexes for relationships
    new Schema\Generator\RenderModifiers(),         // Implement schema modifications
    new Annotated\MergeIndexes(),                   // Merge #[Table] index annotations
    new Schema\Generator\SyncTables(),              // Align table changes with the database
    new Schema\Generator\GenerateTypecast(),        // Typecast non-string columns
]);
```

In our example, we use `SyncTables` generator to automatically update the database schema. Read more about schema
synchronization in the [Synchronizing Database Schema](../advanced/sync-schema.md) section.

> **Warning:**
> The `SyncTables` generator will modify your database structure in line with your schema. Do not execute this on a
> production database without understanding its implications!

With the schema compiled, it can be integrated into the ORM:

```php index.php
use Cycle\ORM;
use Cycle\ORM\Schema;

$schema = /** ... */;

$orm = new ORM\ORM(new ORM\Factory($dbal), Schema($schema));
```

It's best practice to cache the generated schema in production and regenerate it only when required, ensuring optimal
performance.

For debugging or review, you can dump the `$schema` variable, giving you a detailed look into your entity schema's
internal representation. For more human-friendly rendering, consider using the `cycle/schema-renderer` package.

**Updating Entity Schema**

As your application grows, there may be times when you need to adjust your entity schema, such as adding new columns or
changing existing ones. To do so, simply modify your entity and re-run the script.

```php
#[Column(type: "int", nullable: true)]
protected ?int $age = null;
```

Upon your next script execution, the `SyncTables` generator will automatically update the schema to reflect these
changes.

### Custom Definition of Entity Schema

For projects that require a more dynamic or programmatic approach to entity mapping, Cycle ORM provides the ability to
define entity schema programmatically.

> **Warning:**
> Remember, automatic database migrations aren't available in this mode.

The mapping for `User` entity can be explicitly defined as:

```php index.php
use Cycle\ORM;
use Cycle\ORM\Schema;
use Cycle\ORM\Mapper\Mapper;

$dbal = /** ... */;

$orm = new ORM\ORM(new ORM\Factory($dbal), new Schema([
    'user' => [
        Schema::MAPPER => Mapper::class, // default POPO mapper
        Schema::ENTITY => User::class,
        Schema::DATABASE => 'default',
        Schema::TABLE => 'users',
        Schema::PRIMARY_KEY => 'id',

        // property => column
        Schema::COLUMNS => [
            'id' => 'id',
            'name' => 'name',
        ],

        Schema::TYPECAST => [
            'id' => 'int',
        ],

        Schema::RELATIONS => [],
    ]
]));
```

This method offers more control as it allows for dynamic and complex mappings. However, it can also be more verbose and
might abstract away some of the clarity that attributes provide.

> **Note:**
> Read more about available schema options in the [Manually defined Mapping Schema](../schema/manual.md) section.

For a deeper dive into various mapping techniques, consult the dedicated sections in the ORM documentation, such
as [dynamic mapping](/docs/en/schema/dynamic-schema.md#example).

## Working with Entities

Cycle ORM offers an intuitive and seamless way to interact with your entities, handling persistence, retrieval,
updating, and deletion tasks with ease. Once you've properly configured your ORM, the `Cycle\ORM\EntityManager` will
become the main tool for these operations. Below, we provide a walkthrough of common entity tasks.

> **Note:**
> Read more about Crud operations in the [Create, Update and Delete](../basic/crud.md) section.

### Setting up Entity Manager

Before you delve into operations, ensure you've instantiated the `EntityManager`:

```php index.php
use Cycle\ORM\EntityManager;

$orm = /** ... */;

$em = new EntityManager($orm);
```

### Creating and Persisting Entities

To persist an entity, simply create a new instance and register it with the `EntityManager`:

```php index.php
// ...

$user = new \Example\User("Antony");
$em->persist($user)->run();
```

You can immediately dump the object to see newly generated primary key:

```php index.php
// ...

print_r($user);
```

### Fetching Entities

Entities can be easily fetched from the database using their primary key through the appropriate repository:

```php index.php
// ...

$user = $orm->getRepository(\Example\User::class)->findByPK(1);
print_r($user);
```

> **Note:**
> Read more about using repository in the [Select Entity](../basic/select.md) section.

> **Warning:**
> Remove the code from the section above to avoid fetching the entity from memory.

### Updating Entities

Updating an entity's data is straightforward: modify the desired properties, then persist the changes using
the `EntityManager`:

```php index.php
// ...

$user = /**  */;
$user->setName("John");

$em->persist($user)->run();
print_r($user);
```

### Deleting Entities

Removing an entity from the database is executed through the `delete` method of the `EntityManager`:

```php index.php
// ...

$user = /**  */;
$em->delete($user)->run();
```

## Conclusion

Cycle ORM stands out as a robust and flexible tool for managing database operations in PHP applications. Its
straightforward configuration process makes it approachable for both newcomers and experienced developers alike. Beyond
its simplicity, its modular design and extensible architecture ensure that as your application grows and evolves, Cycle
ORM can adapt and scale alongside it.
